Americans built up trillions of dollars in savings during the pandemic. Now, with prices rising at their fastest pace in decades, they are tapping that stockpile to keep on spending.
Consumer spending rose 0.9 percent in April, the Commerce Department 
said on Friday
, as Americans shook off high prices to buy tickets for flights, sports events and other experiences they had to forego earlier in the pandemic. Auto sales also increased as car buyers snapped up vehicles after months of shortages.
Incomes are rising, too, the result of a robust job market and the fastest wage growth in decades. But incomes aren’t keeping up with spending, or with rising prices: After-tax income rose 0.3 percent in April from the prior month and was flat after accounting for inflation.
As a result, Americans are fueling their spending by saving less. Households set aside just 4.4 percent of their after-tax income last month, the lowest savings rate since 2008.
Record levels of government aid during the pandemic, combined with reduced spending on many leisure activities, allowed Americans to build up a substantial reserve of extra savings — $2.5 trillion or more by some estimates. That cushion could allow consumers to keep spending even as prices rise. A 
snapshot
 of Americans’ financial health conducted last fall and released by the Federal Reserve this week found that 78 percent of respondents felt they were “doing at least OK” — the highest rate in the survey’s nine-year history.
But relying on savings is unsustainable in the long run. Economists say many lower-income households have probably already exhausted their savings, or will in the months ahead, especially as high gas and food prices continue to take a toll. Balances of credit cards and similar types of debt rose at a 35.3 percent annual rate in March, the biggest one-month increase since 1998, according to 
data from the Federal Reserve
.
“If you’re depending on the credit card to fund your spending, that’s by definition not sustainable,” said Tim Quinlan, a senior economist for Wells Fargo. Consumer spending has held up better than most forecasters expected, he said, but is likely to slow in the months ahead.
Consumers aren’t likely to get much relief from rising prices anytime soon. Inflation cooled slightly in April but remained close to a four-decade high.
Consumer prices rose 0.2 percent last month from March and were up 6.3 percent from a year earlier, the Commerce Department report showed. That was down from a 6.6 percent annual increase in March, which represented the 
fastest pace of inflation since 1982
.
Economists and investors closely watch the report’s Personal Consumption Expenditures price index, an alternative to the better-known Consumer Price Index, because the Federal Reserve prefers it as a measure of inflation. The central bank has been raising interest rates and has announced it will begin paring its assets in a bid to cool the economy and tame inflation.
In a 
statement released by the White House
 on Friday, President Biden called the dip in inflation “a sign of progress, even as we have more work to do.”
The slowdown in inflation in April was largely the result of a drop in the price of gasoline and other energy. Gas prices soared in February and March largely because of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, then moderated somewhat in April. They have 
risen again
 in recent weeks, however, which could push measures of inflation back up in May. Food prices have also been rising quickly in recent months, a pattern that continued in April.
Stripping out the volatile food and fuel categories, consumer prices were up 4.9 percent in April from a year earlier. That core measure, which some economists view as a more reliable guide to the underlying rate of inflation, was up 0.3 percent from a month earlier, little changed from the rate of increase in March.
The comparatively tame increase in core prices in the data released Friday stood in contrast to the 
sharp acceleration
 in the equivalent measure in the Consumer Price Index report released by the Labor Department this month. The divergence was mostly the result of differences in the way the two measures count airline fares, however, and economists said the Fed was unlikely to take much comfort from the Commerce Department data.
“My suspicion is they will probably look through the slowdown,” said Omair Sharif, the founder of the research firm Inflation Insights. He noted that the core index also slowed in the fall, only to pick up again at the end of the year, catching the Fed off guard.
Many forecasters believe that the headline inflation rate peaked in March and that April marked the beginning of a gradual cool-down. But the recent rebound in gas prices threatens to complicate that picture. And even if inflation continues to ebb, prices are still rising far more quickly than the Fed’s target of 2 percent over time.
The public, Mr. Quinlan said, is unlikely to see the slight moderation in inflation as much to celebrate.
“To them, the year-over-year growth in prices doesn’t matter,” he said. “It’s, why does a crappy lunch cost $12 now?”
Inflation has taken a toll on consumer sentiment, which 
fell 10.4 percent in May
 to its lowest level in more than a decade, according to a long-running survey from the University of Michigan. So far, however, that pessimism hasn’t translated into reduced spending.
“At least in the second quarter, consumers really had their purses wide open,” said Kathy Bostjancic, the chief U.S. economist at Oxford Economics. “We think eventually that’s going to have limits. Right now we’re all feeling pent-up and just need to travel. But come next year, it’s a different story.”
More spending has been 
moving toward experiences
 like hotel stays, concerts and haircuts in recent months as people have grown more comfortable in crowded spaces. Prices for goods have been 
rising faster
 than the cost of services, in part because of ongoing supply chain snarls and the war in Ukraine. Adjusted for inflation, goods spending rose 1 percent over the month, while services spending rose 0.5 percent.
That dynamic has rocked big-box stores like 
Walmart
 and 
Target
, which have found themselves unable to pass along higher costs to shoppers. Stocks of discount retailers like 
Dollar Tree
, by contrast, surged on Thursday as they reported sales increases and raised their earnings forecasts.
The Securities and Exchange Commission on Friday 
revealed
 that it began probing Elon Musk’s purchases of Twitter stock in early April and looking into whether he properly disclosed his stake and his intentions for the social media company.
In a regulatory filing, the agency said it had approached Mr. Musk on April 4. At the time, Mr. Musk, who is the world’s richest man, had just become 
Twitter’s largest shareholder
 with a 9.2 percent stake in the company. Mr. Musk also filed a securities document that indicated that he planned for the investment to be passive and that he did not intend to pursue control of the company.
Ten days later, Mr. Musk 
offered $54.20 a share
 to buy Twitter outright. Twitter later agreed to 
sell itself to Mr. Musk for roughly $44 billion
; the transaction is expected to close in the next few months.
In a 
letter to Mr. Musk
 dated April 4, the S.E.C. questioned whether he had disclosed his stake at the right time. The law requires shareholders who buy more than 5 percent of a company’s shares to disclose their ownership within 10 days of reaching that threshold. In regulatory filings, Mr. Musk has said he crossed that threshold on March 14, but did not make his purchases public until April 4.
In its letter, the S.E.C. also questioned whether Mr. Musk was truly a “passive” investor, given that he had already publicly criticized Twitter’s content moderation policies and tweeted recommendations about how the social media company should be changed.
Filing as a “passive investor” while secretly planning to take over a company is 
“fraudulent,”
 some legal experts have said. Such cases are rarely prosecuted and are difficult to prove, they have added.
The S.E.C. declined to comment. Mr. Musk did not respond to a request for comment. An attorney for Mr. Musk declined to comment.
The Federal Trade Commission is also looking into whether Mr. Musk violated disclosure requirements by failing to notify the agency of his 
sizable stake in Twitter
. Investors typically must notify antitrust regulators of large share purchases to give government officials 30 days to review the transaction for competition violations.
Mr. Musk, who is also the chief executive of the electric car company Tesla and the rocket maker SpaceX, has previously tangled with the S.E.C. He faced an investigation from the regulator in 2018 when he announced on Twitter that he planned to take Tesla private and that he had secured financing for the deal.
The S.E.C. charged Mr. Musk with securities fraud because it said the transaction he referred to was uncertain and funding had not been locked down. Mr. Musk and Tesla settled for $40 million. Under the terms of his agreement with the regulator, Mr. Musk must run his tweets by a Tesla lawyer if they contain material statements about the carmaker. Last month, Mr. Musk tried to end the 
tweet approval arrangement
 in court, but a judge denied his request.
A shareholder lawsuit against Mr. Musk over his tweet claiming he planned to take Tesla private is ongoing. Mr. Musk also faces a lawsuit from Twitter shareholders over his delayed disclosure about his purchases of the social media company’s stock.
Americans continued to add more cash to their wallets in April, but found that it wouldn’t go as far as it did this time last year, according to data released on Friday.
Personal income after taxes rose 0.3 percent last month, but fell 0.3 percent from the same month last year, reflecting the government’s 2021 distribution of stimulus checks. 
Adjusted for inflation
, that measure of income was flat on the month but down 6.2 percent from last year. Spending climbed 0.9 percent over the month, but 
rose less in real terms
 as inflation continued to rise at its fastest pace in decades.
The new numbers, from the Commerce Department, suggest that after two years of Covid restrictions, consumer appetites are robust despite goods shortages, overbooked airplanes and skyrocketing oil prices driving up the cost of everyday life. Economists increasingly project that momentum will slow as the Federal Reserve tries to cool the U.S. economy with interest-rate hikes and pandemic stimulus wanes.
“At least in the second quarter, consumers really had their purses wide open,” said Kathy Bostjancic, chief U.S. economist at Oxford Economics. “We think eventually that’s going to have limits. Right now we’re all feeling pent-up and just need to travel. But come next year, it’s a different story.”
More spending has been 
moving toward experiences
 like hotel stays, concerts and haircuts in recent months as people have grown more comfortable in crowded spaces. Goods prices, while disrupted by ongoing supply chain snarls and the war in Ukraine, have been 
rising faster
 than the cost of services. Adjusted for inflation, goods spending rose 1 percent over the month, while services spending rose 0.5 percent.
That dynamic has rocked big-box stores like 
Walmart
 and 
Target
, which have found themselves unable to pass along higher costs to shoppers. Stocks of discount retailers like 
Dollar Tree
, by contrast, surged on Thursday as they reported sales increases and raised their earnings forecasts.
America’s ongoing consumption binge has been fueled by a very low unemployment rate and relatively strong wage increases, especially on the lower end of the income spectrum. A 
snapshot
 of Americans’ financial health conducted last fall and released by the Federal Reserve this week found that 78 percent of respondents felt they were “doing at least OK” — the highest rate in the survey’s nine-year history.
That sense of financial well-being during the pandemic had been buoyed by bank accounts fattened by government stimulus checks and suppressed spending on things like office clothing and business travel. But while household balance sheets remain healthy, the April data shows that people are 
putting away less
 as a percentage of their disposable income than they were even before the pandemic began. The personal savings rate dropped to 4.4 percent, the lowest since September 2008, down from 5 percent in March.
Stocks on Wall Street edged higher on Friday, after the release of 
inflation data
 showed a moderating pace of price increases. Indexes were also higher in Europe and Asia, following a rally in the United States 
the day before
. The S&P 500 is on track to end a streak of seven consecutive weekly declines dating to early April.
Investors have put more than $20 billion into global stocks this week, mostly in the United States, according to Bank of America. That was the largest net inflow in 10 weeks, the bank’s analysts said in a report, suggesting that a “summer rally bandwagon” is gaining momentum.
The annual World Economic Forum, delayed from its normal winter date by Covid, has wrapped up. The high-profile conference in the Swiss resort of Davos, which draws leaders from government, business and nonprofits, has returned for the first time since coronavirus shut down the world — but in the midst of a war in Europe.
Reporters from 
the DealBook newsletter
 were on hand, and these are their takeaways:
The 
collapse in crypto prices
 this month has renewed 
scrutiny
 of the celebrity marketers who sell virtual currencies to the masses.
Over the last year, the actor 
Matt Damon
 and the comedian Larry David have starred in high-profile TV commercials for crypto platforms, trumpeting digital assets as an unmissable moneymaking opportunity. Those ads drew criticism from crypto skeptics, but they were tied to mainstream companies with hundreds of millions of dollars in revenue.
A far seedier form of crypto promotion has flourished on social media, rife with undisclosed conflicts of interest and exaggerated claims about skyrocketing profits. Celebrity influencers like Kim Kardashian and 
Floyd Mayweather
 have made millions of dollars endorsing specific and often dubious crypto investments, urging fans to buy obscure coins that quickly crashed in value, or shilling little-known collections of 
nonfungible tokens
, the unique digital files known as NFTs.
In some cases, promoters 
have admitted
 that they failed to disclose personal or financial ties to projects advertised on their feeds, a potential violation of federal marketing regulations, 
David Yaffe-Bellany reports for The New York Times
. And even before the crypto market’s recent downturn, a series of these influencer-backed ventures had 
crashed spectacularly
, hurting amateur traders and prompting lawsuits that could force some celebrities to compensate investors for their losses.
Daniel Defense, the company that made the rifle a gunman used to kill 21 people inside a Texas elementary school this week, was one of hundreds of gun makers and merchants that got emergency small-business aid from the federal government through the Paycheck Protection Program.
The company, based in Ellabell, Ga., received a $3.1 million loan in early April 2020 — just days after the relief fund opened, when many companies were 
struggling to break through a crush of applications
 as the pandemic began.
The loan, made by Cadence Bank, was used to support some 200 employees, according to government records. Daniel Defense met the program’s requirements to have its loan forgiven, and it was paid off by the government in June 2021.
A Daniel Defense rifle was used in the attack on Robb Elementary School in Uvalde, Texas, on Tuesday, according to a state police briefing received by State Senator John Whitmire of Houston. Nineteen children and two adults were killed at the school, and several other children were wounded. The 18-year-old gunman also wounded his grandmother before attacking the school.
“We are deeply saddened by the tragic events in Texas this week,” the company wrote in 
a statement posted on its website
. “We will cooperate with all federal, state and local law enforcement authorities in their investigations.”
Company representatives did not immediately respond to questions about the Paycheck Protection Program loan. The Small Business Administration, which oversaw the program, declined to comment, citing agency policy “spanning multiple previous administrations” not to comment on individual borrowers.
Asked about the loan at the White House press briefing on Thursday, Karine Jean-Pierre, the White House press secretary, said it was the first she was hearing about the loan and that she would look into it.
Virtually every small business in America — generally defined by the government as those with fewer than 500 workers — qualified for help through the Paycheck Protection Program, which required applicants simply to certify that the “economic uncertainty” caused by the pandemic made it necessary for them to seek help from the government fund.
Daniel Defense is a privately held company, so it doesn’t publicly report its sales, but government data shows that it made significantly more guns in 2020, after the pandemic took hold, compared with a year earlier. The company 
made more than 51,000 firearms in 2020
, and 
fewer than 32,000 in 2019
, according to data from the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives.
Nearly 500 gun and ammunition makers and retailers received federal support through the $800 billion relief program. The industry collectively took in loans totaling $125 million, according to a New York Times analysis of 
government data
.
Twenty-three manufacturers, including Daniel Defense, received loans of $1 million or more. The largest, for $10 million — the maximum loan available through the relief fund — went to RemArms, a Georgia company that acquired assets and a manufacturing facility from 
Remington after it filed for bankruptcy
.